#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Signaling footprints outperform pathway expression based methods for cancer
 drug sensitivity and survival
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Michael Schubert, Luz Garcia Alonso, Martina Klünemann, Nils Blüthgen, Julio
 Saez Rodriguez 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Investigations of cancer drug response and survival are mostly focussed
 on DNA mutations.
 This has yielded multiple markers, however, they are rarely put in functional
 context of the signaling aberrations they create.
 Because the amount of phosphorylation data available lags behind the one
 of genomic data, we created a platform which infers signaling activity
 by identifying publicly available perturbation experiments and the genes
 responsive to a certain pathway.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
We compared how Gene Ontology, pathway expression, and signaling footprints
 performed for predicting cell line drug response and patient survival,
 and found that the latter outperformed the other two on both accounts.
 Using both our method and pathway expression mapping, we are beginning
 to understand how signaling activity and pathway expression are interlinked
 in both cell lines and tumours.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Taken together, our results suggest that mutation-based biomarkers should
 be augmented by consensus gene expression signatures in order to improve
 preclinical and clinical performance.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With sequencing technologies becoming more and more commonplace for cancer
 diagnosis in both the clinical and preclinical setting, there is a wealth
 of molecular data available that likely harbors yet undiscovered treatment
 opportunities.
 Efforts like the TCGA/ICGC have pioneered this characterization on a large
 scale, offering the opportunity to derive large amounts of information
 about individual tumors.
 This represents a step forward over basing the treatment of an individual
 on the tissue of tumor origin alone, with mutational screens and sensitivity
 markers providing a first glimpse of the direction that personalized medicine
 is going to take.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the major challenges is how to use the available molecular data in
 an efficient and reproducible manner.
 While this is relatively straightforward for mutational data (mostly used
 as binary features), it gets much for challenging for higher content readouts
 like gene expression or DNA methylation.
 Specifically, expression-derived biomarkers that were able to separate
 distinct populations in a given conditions have often failed to replicate
 their function once the conditions are altered.
 As DNA methylation is dynamic, it will likely offer the same challenges.
 There is still a tremendous amount of information that should be used to
 decide on the optimal treatment, but most approaches have fallen short
 of that promise.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One way genes expression has shown promise is using global clustering to
 identify subtypes of the disease, and associating those with different
 drug response or survival outcome.
 We believe that stratifying patients in a reproducible manner should involve
 both the overall clustering of the data as well as more specific, functionally
 relevant readouts.
 An example of those functional readouts is the expression level of pre-defined
 pathway sets - mostly using the GSEA scores - that has been reported in
 numerous publications, but also more sophisticated methods that attempt
 to quantify the signal flow, such as SPIA (Tarca et al.
 2008), PARADIGM (Vaske et al.
 2010), or Pathifier (Drier et al.
 2013).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These methods, however, stand at odds with the notion that signalling in
 animal - and thus human - cells is tightly post-translationally regulated,
 since they are based on the mRNA expression of the signalling proteins,
 in one way or another.
 To date, it is largely unexplored how much those pathway-expression-based
 methods are able to make statements about the signal transmission in a
 protein network.
 We propose a different strategy: use a large body of publicly available
 perturbation experiments to quantify gene expression responses to a specified
 set of stimuli, and then use those genes to infer the upstream signal required
 to change their expression.
 This is one way by which - only using gene expression data - we can indirectly
 observe activity instead of just mRNA expression.
 To our knowledge, such an approach has only been taken by
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
include Bild2006 here with transfection of oncogenes
\end_layout

\end_inset

 (Parikh et al.
 2010), where the authors did not focus on cancer, and (Gatza et al.
 2010; Gatza et al.
 2014; Bild et al.
 2005) that derived their signatures using a single cell line and perturbation
 agent concentration only.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Taking our method and previously published approaches
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Julio: one likely question is how this relates/would perform in the context
 of the NCI-DREAM challenge (Costello et al Nat Biot 2014).
 Specially since best performers used PARADIGM.
 I am not saying we have to do this before submissions, but is possibly
 coming
\end_layout

\end_inset

, we investigated how the different pathway scores, derived from mRNA expression
, relate to or are able to explain drug sensitivity in cancer cell lines
 and survival in primary tumors using the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in
 Cancer (GDSC) (Garnett et al.
 2012) and TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network et al.
 2013) data, respectively.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Results
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Consensus gene signatures reveal pathway-response transcriptional modules
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
gene signatures are very different, even if they represent the same thing
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
averaging we can get sigs that are more valid than individual
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We have curated a total of 208 different submissions to ArrayExpress/GEO,
 spanning perturbations of a total of 11 pathways, 580 experiment (a comparison
 between basal and perturbed arrays; if there were multiple time points,
 different cells, different concentrations, or different perturbing agents
 within a single database submission, they were considered as different
 experiments), and 2652 arrays.
 After quality control, there were a total of 555 experiments remaining.
 The full set of perturbing agents, number of experiments, and cells those
 were carried out on is listed in table S0.
 For a workflow schema, see figure 1A, points 1-3.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We obtained z-scores (cf.
 figure 1A/4), for which we performed a multiple linear regression (figure
 1A/5) with perturbation coefficients as described in figure 1B.
 We could use the resulting matrix (figure 1A/6) to assign pathway scores
 to gene expression data by a simple matrix multiplication.
 When comparing the difference in assigned scores between basal and perturbed
 conditions across all available perturbations, we found that our signatures
 are indeed able to recover the pathway originally perturbed, even though
 the experiments used in the model comprised a wide range of different experimen
tal conditions (t-test of current pathway vs.
 others, result shown in figure 1C).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Transcriptional footprints are different to pathway expression
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
definition of footprint: expression level of pathway response genes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
should compare mutation assocs in TCGA here
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
if we get better mutation assocs than pathway expr, we are sorted for making
 step to basal expression enrichment as well
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next, we were interested in how our perturbation-responsive genes are related
 to induction of pathway expression and other expressed modules associated
 with a known function (represented by GO categories).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For pathway-responsive genes, we found that pathway perturbations are mostly
 connected to their response-target genes (figure 2A), as we would expect
 because this is the effect we are modeling.
 Apart from this primary effect, we would expect for some pathways to activate
 other pathways on a post-translational level and thus also increase the
 signature of target genes of the latter.
 We detected the following overlaps between a perturbed pathway and a significan
t induction of genes expressed responsive to another pathway: EGFR stimulations
 triggered a strong expression of MAPK-responsive genes and a weaker expression
 of PI3K-responsive genes.
 Conversely, MAPK perturbation also showed a strong effect on EGFR-responsive
 genes.
 These are expected given that MAPK and PI3K are downstream of EGFR.
 We found the same structure of hierarchical pathway activation between
 NFkB stimulation and TNFa-responsive genes, where NFkB also weakly induces
 JAK-STAT responsive genes (all shown in figure 1C).
 Again, this is expected and known in literature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We also find that the following pathways are changing in expression upon
 stimulation of the same pathway: NFkB (TNFa), JAK-STAT and Hypoxia show
 a strong association between the pathway being perturbed and increased
 expression of members of the same pathway, representing gene-regulatory
 feedback loops.
 In contrast, both EGFR and MAPK perturbations cause expression of p53 pathway
 members, which can be explained by MAPK/EGFR activating cell-cycle-promoting
 genes and p53 inhibiting them (GO categories connected to the respective
 pathways, figure 2B).
 MAPK also causes expression of the TGFb pathway.
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
details see --> (Chapnick et al.
 2011)
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Similarly, activation of NFkB causes expression of the MAPK pathway.
 Hypoxia causes expression of JAK-STAT and TGFb members, but not VEGF
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
extend explanation here, use GO associations in 2C
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Transcriptional footprints in basal expression
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
if we can show
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
rationale for going from perturbed to basal exp
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
scores of GDSC, TCGA samples
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Differential pathway impact of TP53 variants with implications in BRCA
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
TP53 is the most abundantly mutated gene in the TCGA cohorts.
 As a well-known tumor suppressor, it is responsible for G1/S transition
 cell cycle arrest on DNA damage.
 Recently, variants of TP53 have been shown to not only lose its original
 function but also to activate expression of oncogenes in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
 (Do et al.
 2012) and breast cancer cell lines (Zhu et al.
 2015).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We were interested in whether mutations in TP53 can substitute for pathway-activ
ating mutations in signaling proteins in terms of increasing the expression
 of pathway-responsive genes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Differential pathway impact of KRAS variants with implications in ***??
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
figure out which other mutated gene + variant we can get similar info from
 (there are quite some sign assocs, check if they fit pathway activation
 + in which cancer) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Pan-cancer associations between pathway scores and cell line drug response
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
MAPK/EGFR+MEKi dominate associations
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
can stratify using scores only
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
performance similar to mutations
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
can stratify within mutated population (but not for TP53)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The next question we tried to answer is how well our pathway-responsive
 genes are able to explain drug sensitivity in cancer cell lines.
 We took IC50 values from the GDSC project (Iorio2015, submitted) and calculated
 statistical associations with our method, and GSEA using the same pathways
 in Reactome (Croft et al.
 2011) or Gene Ontology (Gene Ontology Consortium 2004), both for a pan-cancer
 and a tissue-specific condition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We found that for the pan-cancer setting, there were 161 significant association
s (FDR<5%, conditioned on tissue of origin) for our method and 27 and 66
 for Gene Ontology and Reactome pathways, respectively.
 The top hit using our method was the associations between Nutlin-3a and
 p53-responsive genes.
 Nutlin-3a is an MDM2-inhibitor that in turn stabilizes TP53, where it has
 also previously been shown that a mutation in TP53 is strongly associated
 with increased resistance to Nutlin-3a (Garnett et al.
 2012).
 This is thus a well-understood mechanism of sensitivity (presence) or resistanc
e (absence of TP53 activity) to this drug that our method recovers but neither
 GO or Reactome pathways do.
 We also find strong association between different MEK inhibitors (Trametinib,
 RDEA119, CI-1040, etc.) and MAPK/EGFR activation, but also a Raf (AZ628)
 or TAK1 (7-Oxozeaonol) inhibitor.
 These are all associations that the other methods miss or associate with
 a different pathway.
 We then went on to quantify how many of the associations found using either
 GO or Reactome can be explained by pathway-response genes by conditioning
 the associations on the strongest pathway-response association and verifying
 that the pathway expression association is still significant after this
 conditioning.
 For Gene Ontology, there was no association that could not be explained
 by pathway-response genes, and the number of significant associations using
 Reactome pathways dropped to 18.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Tissue-specific associations of drug response
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
focus on clinical drugs
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
stratifications avail: clinical (x2) + experimental
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
significance of stratifications compared to tissues, pathway methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We performed the same kind of associations for each tissue separately, as
 shown in figure 3B.
 We found 75 significant associations for our method vs.
 36 for Reactome and 12 for GO (FDR<10%, corrected for each tissue separately).
 We could show that the associations derived from our method are stronger
 than the alternatives, and that the other methods add no additional information
 over ours except for PI3K expression in BRCA when treating with rTRAIL
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
explanation of this?
\end_layout

\end_inset

 (empty circles in middle and lower panel of figure 3B show a drop below
 significance when conditioning on the best hit of our method).
 Our strongest association was response to Trametinib where sensitivity
 was positively correlated with expression of MAPK-responsive genes, explaining
 a total of 54% of the total variance observed in the IC50s of BRCA drug
 response (FDR 10-5, p 10-8, shown in figure 3C/top).
 While this is expected due to the oncogene addiction paradigm, other strong
 associations included TNFa-responsive genes in SCLC treated with PD-0325901
 (a MEK inhibitor, for sensitivity) and FK866 (an inducer of apoptosis,
 for resistance).
 This indicates a potential dichotomy for drug efficacy for certain drugs
 and tissues to pathway activation that can be inferred from its downstream
 targets.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Furthermore, we could show (figure 3D) that our method improves upon using
 only mutations as biomarkers for drug response.
 Using the examples of Trametinib in BRCA (associated with MAPK activity)
 and PD-0325901 in SCLC (which is associated with both TNFa and MAPK activity),
 we show that inferred pathway activity is not only equivalent in association
 strength to MAPK mutations (a mutation in either MAP2K1, K-Ras, N-Ras or
 B-Raf), but they can be used in combination to yield a better biomarker
 than any single method.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Drug response improvement over other methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
GSEA, Reactome enrichment
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
conditioned association performance (figure in suppl)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
will not do SPIA, pathifier, PARADIGM here because they need normals + we
 don’t have
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
find some associations that are new and follow up on them (+add to figure)
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Implications for patient survival
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
missing
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Discussion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The explanation of phenotypes in cancer, such as cell line drug response
 or patient survival has largely been focussed on genomic mutations in recent
 years, where gene expression signatures did not play a significant part
 in biomarker discovery.
 The latter have held an unfavorable reputation: they have been shown to
 more strongly correlate with the lab they were derived in than the actual
 phenotype, strongly depend on the experimental setup and exact conditions
 they were created, or featured in high-profile papers that later had to
 be retracted.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We have achieved a significant progress to overcome these limitations by
 assembling a large compendium of pathway-responsive gene signatures derived
 from a wide range of different conditions.
 We could confirm this heterogeneity in gene expression experiments, but
 also found that consensus signatures are strongly correlated with pathway
 perturbations and less with other conditions that they are confounded with.
 The only other similar efforts, to the best of our knowledge, are the SPEED
 database (Parikh et al.
 2010) and MCF10A breast cancer signatures (Gatza et al.
 2010).
 Whereas the former used a smaller but still significant set of publicly
 available experiments, they only analysis they did using their signatures
 was to compute the overlap between genes present in their signatures and
 Gene Ontology categories, and genes between their pathways.
 In the latter article the authors experimentally derived pathway-response
 signatures for a single condition (MCF10A cell line, one perturbation/time
 point per experiment).
 Not only are those signatures non-transferable to other cancer types, but
 they likely suffer from the same drawbacks as expression signatures in
 terms of general stability and reproducibility.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
missing: characterization of signatures
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In terms of drug associations, we have shown that our method outperforms
 the associations obtained by using GSEA on either pathway expression or
 GO modules, that strong tissue-specific associations are able to explain
 a significant part of the overall variability in the response to some drugs,
 and that pathway associations can be used to refine mutational biomarkers,
 or act as biomarkers themselves when there is no known associated mutation
 for a given drug (in the case of TNFa-related associations).
 We expect that this method of deriving signatures for pathway activity
 will also in other contexts be able to discover both oncogene addiction
 footprints to support available mutational biomarkers, as well as provide
 insights into pathway activation patterns that mediate sensitivity or resistanc
e to a subset of drugs that other pathway-expression based methods are not
 able to.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
missing: survival analysis
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Overall, we would argue that consensus pathway response signatures are a
 better measure of pathway activity than pathway expression, irrespective
 of whether the latter was derived from gene sets or directed paths.
 We have shown its utility for cell line drug response and patient survival,
 as well that they are able to refine our understanding of the impact of
 mutations in both the general (figure to do) as well as the particular
 case (figure 3D).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
as per Julio's comment: limitations,future directions
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
GDSC and TCGA data
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We used the GDSC data published in (Iorio2015, in revision), comprised of
 molecular data for 1,001 cell lines and 265 anticancer drugs, specifically
 microarray gene expression data and the IC50 values for each drug-cell
 line combination.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For TCGA data, we used the Firehose tool from the BROAD institute (http://gdac.br
oadinstitute.org/) to download data labelled level 3 RNA-seq v2.
 We extracted the raw counts from the text files for each gene, discarded
 those that did not have a valid HGNC symbol, and averaged expression levels
 where more than one row corresponded to a given gene.
 We then performed a voom transformation (limma package, BioConductor) for
 each TCGA study separately, to be able to use linear modeling techniques
 with the count-based RNA-seq data.
 The data used corresponds to 00 tissues and a total of 00000 tumor and
 0000 matched normal samples.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also from Firehose we downloaded clinical data for each TCGA patient in
 the same cohorts as above.
 We extracted the vital status and used known survival time or known time
 of last follow-up as the survival time for the downstream analyses.
 The overlap of TCGA data where we could obtain both mRNA expression levels
 as well as survival times is 0000 distributed across 00 tissues.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
A database and linear classifier of perturbation-responsive genes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
rework this section after merge from results
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Our method is dependent on a sufficiently large number publicly available
 perturbation experiments that activate or inhibit one of the pathways we
 were looking at.
 The following conditions needed to be met in order for us to consider an
 experiment: (1) the compound or factor used for perturbation was one of
 our curated list of pathway-perturbing agents (for a list, see table S0);
 (2) the perturbation lasted for less than 24 hours to capture genes that
 belong to the primary response; (3) there was raw data available for at
 least two control arrays and one perturbed array; (4) it was a single-channel
 array; (5) we could process the arrays using available BioConductor packages;
 (6) the array was not custom-made so we could use standard annotations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
*
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We curated a list of known pathway activators and inhibitors for 00 pathways,
 where the interaction between each compound and pathway is well established
 in literature.
 We then used those as query terms for public perturbation experiments in
 the ArrayExpress database (Parkinson et al.
 2007).
 We included all single-channel microarrays with at least duplicates in
 the basal condition with raw data available that could be processed by
 either the limma (Smyth 2005), oligo (Carvalho & Irizarry 2010), or affy
 (Gautier et al.
 2004) BioConductor packages and for which there was a respective annotation
 package available.
 Multiple concentrations or time points in a series of arrays were considered
 as individual experiments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We first calculated a probe-level for each full series of arrays, where
 we performed quality control of the raw data using RLE and NUSE cutoffs
 under 0.1 and kept all arrays below that threshold.
 If after filtering less than two basal condition arrays remained, the whole
 experiment was discarded.
 For the remaining series, we normalized using the RMA algorithm and mapped
 the probe identifiers to HGNC symbols.
 For each HGNC symbol, we calculated a model based on mean and standard
 deviation of the gene expression level, and computed the z-score as average
 number of standard deviations that the expression level in the perturbed
 array was shifted from the basal arrays.
 We then performed LOESS smoothing for all z-scores in a given experiment
 using our null model, as described in (Parikh et al.
 2010).
 From the z-scores of all experiments and all pathways, we performed a multiple
 linear regression with the pathway as input and the z-scores as response
 variable, with a coefficients matrix as described in figure 1B.
 We selected the top 100 genes according to their p-value for each pathway,
 and took their fitted z-scores as coefficient.
 This yielded a matrix with HGNC symbols x pathways, where each pathway
 had 100 non-zero gene coefficients (supplied in table S0).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Each column of the SPEED matrix corresponds to a plane in gene expression
 space, in which each cell line or tumor sample is located.
 If you follow its normal vector from the origin, the distance it travels
 corresponds to the pathway score each sample is assigned.
 In practice, this is achieved by a simple matrix multiplication between
 the SPEED and the gene expression matrices.
 We then scaled each score to have a mean of zero and standard deviation
 of one, in order to factor out the difference in strength of gene expression
 signatures and thus be able to compare the relative scores across pathways
 and samples at the same time.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Pathway and Gene Ontology scores
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We matched our defined set of pathways to the publicly available pathway
 databases Reactome (Croft et al.
 2011) and KEGG (Kanehisa & Goto 2000), and Gene Ontology (GO) (Gene Ontology
 Consortium 2004) categories (for the detailed mapping, see table S0), to
 obtain a uniform set across pathway resources that makes them comparable.
 We calculated pathway scores as raw gene set enrichment (GSEA) scores that
 we transformed into a normal distribution using a kernel density estimator
 (R package sROC) and a normal transformation.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Integrating tumor and cell line data
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For integrated analyses that comprised both aspects of data that was only
 available for cell lines or tumors respectively, we merged the two datasets
 together using the ComBat method in the SVA package (Leek et al.
 2013).
 We assigned a batch identifier to all GDSC cell lines, and one to every
 TCGA project.
 For each tissue in either GDSC or TCGA, we used a distinct covariate pointing
 to the same cancer type, with the exception that we mapped all of COAD,
 READ, and COADREAD of TCGA to COREAD of GDSC.
 We assigned another covariate to indicate if the TCGA expression data stemmed
 from a tumor (primary, recurrent, or metastatic) or a normal (matched or
 adjacent tissue only, discarding blood).
 We then performed batch correction for the whole of the two datasets together,
 using the batch and covariate identifiers described.
 As a control, we performed both drug and survival associations on the merged
 set as well as the individual ones.
 The associations obtained from the merged set were almost identical with
 the ones obtained from the respective individual sets
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
this and MDS plots before and after merging should be shown somewhere in
 the supplementary 
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Pathifier and SPIA scores
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pathifier (Drier et al.
 2013) and SPIA (Tarca et al.
 2008) scores require the comparison with a normal condition in order to
 compute their scores.
 For this, we took the combined data set of the GDSC and TCGA, performed
 batch correction using ComBat with the GDSC as one batch, TCGA is one batch
 per project, and tissue as a covariate in either case.
 In addition, we included whether the same is a tumor or normal in the TCGA
 as an additional covariate.
 We then computed the pathway scores for each method using an individual
 cell line or tumor sample and using all non-cancerous tissue controls as
 baseline using the BioConductor packages pathifier and SPIA.
 For this, we used Reactome and KEGG pathways as described in the previous
 section, respectively.
 Sample-pathway combinations where scores could not be computed (000 of
 000, or 0.00% total) were imputed using the five nearest neighbors (R package
 impute).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Co-clustering of tumors and cell lines
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Using the batch-corrected gene expression data that merged tumor and cell
 line expression as described with the pathifier and SPIA scores, we also
 performed non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) clustering using multiplicati
ve updating derived from libNMF (Janecek et al.
 2011) for cluster numbers (k) between 2 and 10, with 00 repetitions using
 different initial conditions each.
 With those, we computed the cophenetic coefficient for each k, and chose
 the local maxima as more suitable numbers for cluster analysis.
 As the clustering was performed on data merged together between cell lines
 and tumors, we can try and infer drug responses from clinically derived
 subtypes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Drug associations using GDSC cell lines
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We performed drug association using a linear model between 265 drug IC50s
 and 11 inferred pathway scores (lm function, R stats package), doing a
 total of 2915 comparisons for which we correct the p-values using the false
 discovery rate.
 For pan-cancer associations, we used the cancer type as a covariate in
 order to discard the effect that different tissues have on the observed
 drug response.
 While this will also remove genuine differences in pathway activation between
 different cancer types, we would not be able to distinguish between those
 and other confounders that impact the sensitivity of a certain cell line
 from a given tissue to a drug.
 Our pan-cancer association are thus the same of intra-tissue differences
 in drug response explained by inferred (our method, GO, or Reactome) pathway
 scores.
 For tissue-specific associations, we fit our linear model and correct p-values
 for the false discovery rate for each cancer type separately.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In order to distinguish between Reactome/GO associations that are genuinely
 dependent on pathway expression and those that can be fully explained by
 pathway-responsive genes, we condition each association for those two methods
 by the score of our method that provides the strongest association with
 a given drug.
 Associations that fall under our threshold for significance (5% FDR for
 pan-cancer and 10% FDR for tissue-specific associations) can be explained
 by pathway-response genes and are likely caused by those rather than pathway
 expression (because the former are higher up on the chain of causality,
 cf.
 figure 2B).
 For selected tissue-specific hits, we show linear fits between drug response
 and inferred pathway score using the same model that was used to derive
 the associations (reported p-values in figure 3C are not FDR-corrected,
 but they are in 3B).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We also selected two of our strongest associations to investigate whether
 they provide additional information of what is known by mutation data.
 For two MEK inhibitors, we show the difference between wild-type and mutant
 MAPK pathway (defined is a mutation in either MAP2K1, N-Ras, K-Ras, or
 B-Raf) with a discretized pathway score (upper and lower quartile vs.
 the rest), as well as the combination between the upper quartile of tissue-spec
ific pathway scores and presence of a MAPK mutation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Survival associations using TCGA data
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
missing
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
